---
layout: post
title: "Review: The Third World, developing countries, the South, poor countries"
date:   2018-09-30 
categories: review development_studies
---

Klaus Dodds' essay on international development efforts in the shadow of the
cold war opens with the observation that _words have power_. The author describes
how the global dynamics during the cold war came to label the different nations
of the world as poor vs rich, developed vs developing etc and how these labels
shaped the development rhetoric. Now, in the post-cold war era, these labels
persist and continue to be significant in a global landscape that is changed
and yet still the same in some ways.

The cold war was a period of struggle for ideological and economic dominance of
the world between the two wealthiest nations of the time - the United States and
the Soviet Union. Not an outright war, the prolonged conflict saw both the US
and USSR extending their influence to other countries of the world in order to
install governments sympathetic to their cause. As many of the smaller countries
had recently gained independence from imperialist occupation, the superpowers
channeled development aid to these countries in exchange for implicit or
explicit dependence on and support of the world order led by that particular
superpower. Indeed, the notion and goals of development were themselves a
central part of the competing ideologies between the two countries. Alongside
the carrot of development aid, the two countries waged proxy wars against
governments considered antagonistic to their agenda by political insurgency,
inciting revolution and outright invasion. The discourse instrumental to sustain
this interventionist strategy labeled the smaller, less powerful countries as
_developing_, the _Global South_ or _poor_. This labeling fuelled, on the one hand, a
feeling of exceptionalism in the two superpowers which allowed their governments
to justify international interventions as necessary stabilization of countries
in need. On the other hand, this same labeling allowed the international
development industry to fuel aid and ideas for the economic growth to their
poorer neighbors.

The end of cold war with the folding of USSR in 1990, Klaus notes, brought hope
of a possible attempt to directly address the humanitarian crises in the least
developed nations and bring about a global attempt to help nations develop for
betterment of their citizens, rather than the dual carrot-stick treatment by the
powerful nations towards their own goals. This hope has been mostly for naught.
The North led by the US is once again embroiled in a _war on terror_ with a
similar categorization of friendly and antagonistic countries, and a similar
inefficient arbitrary flow of aid and war onto smaller nations.

The text clearly explains the roots of development thinking and its state in the
post-cold war era. The treatment brings out the frustration meted out to the
developing nations because of the ultimate agenda of the aid providers --
influence in a fragmented world order. Accepting the conclusion that development
efforts propelled by cold war agendas provide mixed results, I find the
expectation that powerful nations would aid the development of poorer nations
for humanitarian causes naive. Humans are a tribal species and nations seldom
have the empathy to help other nations prosper for selfless reasons. Even
partial attempts to extend the nations' concern oversees often lead to domestic
backlash because resources are seen to be squandered while the "situation at
home" is seen to be dire. The contemporary result in the US is Trump. Any
attempt to improve the lot of their citizens must be driven from within the
global South. The text references Non-Alignment Movement as one such attempt in
the cold war era when the developing nations recognized the loss of sovereignty
and long-term well being from the polarized dominance of the two superpowers.
NAM failed to keep the countries together meaningfully because it was unable to
account for the heterogeneity of nations in the South and was unable to tackle
the paucity of resources these nations had to effectively drive policy on the
global stage. To achieve development goals in line with the less powerful
nations' disparate requirements, these nations must create and maintain a
platform that provides them collective bargaining power against the richer
states that otherwise stipulate global policy by default through their superior
resource allocation for the purpose. The dominance of rich nations in WTO and
IMF and the often criticized impact of IMF policies on developing nationsâ€™
social trajectories is a case in point.

At the same time, I think it is important to note, as the text does, the
material progress in the global South in the last century. A large part of the
global population has access to more and better quality material resources than
their ancestors. Even if IMF stipulated market restructuring tramples on
nations' sovereignty, perhaps it delivers on the promise of progress?
Characterization of actual development on the ground, its impact on the people,
and the cost concerning long-term self-sufficiency and resource extraction are
essential and difficult questions to consider.

A somewhat exaggerated analogy to the North-led and North-dependent progress of
the world is the century-old model of imperialist colonization. Are the global
dynamics triggered by the cold war, a new form of imperialism? And if so, is the
cost-benefit of imperialist colonization in favor of the colonized? As an
example, the British were responsible for the construction of an extensive rail
network in the Indian subcontinent. This rail system is an enduring piece of
critical infrastructure for the modern Indian economy. But independence from
imperialist control across the globe is unanimously considered a step in the
right direction for the nation. Self-sufficiency is an integral part of a
nation's progress and the cold war-driven global order does not provide space
for nations to develop the capabilities that would make them self-sufficient.
