---
layout: post
title: "Review: participatory development"
date:   2018-11-28
categories: review development_studies
---

Participatory development refers to the theory and practices in development studies that explicitly include a role for the people targeted by
development projects in the specification, design or implementation of these projects. This loosely defined term refers to a wide variety of
strategies to encourage the involvement of local citizens at various stages of the project, and as such the intention and efficacy of this
participation varies widely. Historically, development studies research was restricted to studying the policy pathways that would lead to development
of the post-colonial nations in a very narrow sense. This definition of development was mostly restricted to economic growth and was heavily
biased by euro-centric ideas of progress. As such, there was no platform for those being emancipated to voice their desires or concerns with the
development agenda set by the scholars in the West, and there was no attempt to include them in the actual implementation of the projects, which was
assumed to be best left to the experts.

There was a reversal of this trend in the latter part of the 20th century when decades of development efforts were seen to bear no fruits and even
successful efforts were seen to have provided mixed benefits to those served. There are various degrees to which various development efforts create
space for the served to voice their opinions. On one end are scholars that see local involvement as a necessary ingredient to the efficient and
effective implementation of preset projects. In practice this means that the goals, means and tools of development are still prescribed by the
experts, while some responsibility and power in the implementation is devolved to the local population. On the other extreme are programs like the
Prgram for Rural Appraisal (PRA) where the external agencies limit themselves to creating spaces for the local population to discover their own
development roadblocks, decide on the best ways to tackle those, and plan and implement the requisite projects. Here, development workers serve as
educators, resource providers, facilitators, and even co-learners in a process essentially driven by the local population. Most instances of
participatory development fall somewhere between these extremes -- some of the goals and tools of development are prescribed by external factors like
state policies and donor intentions and the technological and infrastructure realities of the target regions. Ultimately, participation is about
self-determination and power. Along with the invited spaces of power sharing between development agencies and local populace described above, there
are instances of participation demanded and obtained by the populace through political and activist platforms. The theory of participatory development
anticipates and accepts these claimed spaces of participation.

Although participatory development is widely accepted by development scholars and practitioners to the point of it being part of the _development
orthodoxy_, it faces a few challenges both in its theory and practice. First and foremost, related discourses often pit local development
organizations and civil society platforms against the State and State policies. Assumptions about national development policies being antagonistic to
or ineffective for local development are unfounded. Especially in today's globalized world, local development efforts often face global challenges,
like climate change, that require non-local solutions. The other challenges to participatory development relate to its translation to practice. Many
development agencies do mere lip service to participation, creating a brand around participation and opening up ineffective channels of participation
without any real empowerment of the local population. Even well meaning organization often fail to empower the most disenfranchised because they treat
the target population as homogeneous and fail to consider local power structures. These efforts run the risk of amplifying local differences and
getting blocked by entrenched local institutions.

In conclusion, participation is rightly a necessary ingredient of sustainable and beneficent development of the underserved regions of the world.
Scholars and practitioners should include real deep participation as an important tool in their toolbox along with focus on expert-led and
state-guided development nd be wary of the pitfalls that stem from essentialization of the target population when creating spaces for local
participation in the development effort.
